Have this is an interview question
when I was really young, and
it has ground my gears ever since then.
But somebody said,
can JavaScript have memory leaks?
Yeah, of course, right?
Yeah, they're no, no,
it's garbage collected language
blah blah blah, I was 15.
But anyway, yeah JavaScript gonna
have a ton of memory leaks,
it is garbage collected.
You don't have to do your
own reference counting,
you don't have to do your
own freeing of memory.
But you can write code that does
things that were not intended, and
one of those things can be
retaining memory, right?
It's a very probable thing.
So these categories of memory leaks, which
I think are simple and contrived, but they
are responsible for most of what I see in
production when I look at it memory leaks.
So one of them would be
accidental global variables.
I know this gets covered in quite
a few front of masters courses,
where you are not binding something,
or you're not in strict mode.
And you make a variable, and it magically
gets created up on the window object.
So then when your function falls out of
scope, this thing persists there, right?
Yeah, again, this is simple, but I do,
in general, I think declaring variables
scoped too highly, where that doesn't get
cleaned up is a very common workflow.
Another one is closures have so
many different issues, and this is by far
not an anti closure talk whatsoever, but
closures can have all sorts of issues.
So, for example, here we have this
function, and the function really returns
another function, and that function
only needs access to an integer count.
But in the closure scope,
we made this huge array,
and just the way that these
JavaScript engines work.
It says,
increment has closure over create counter,
we'll keep create counter scope alive,
therefore, huge array gets kept alive.
So again, kind of when you're
working with these closures,
just being careful not to make huge things
that are attached to things that you'll
wanna stay alive forever.
Again, worrying less about authoring and
more about getting good using the dev
tools to spot these kinds of things.
But this is one of my most
common things at work.
I feel this happens all the time where
people will author code in ways where
they retain huge amounts of data because
they only need one property, but
they pass in a whole class,
or something like that.
So closures can be a little bit tricky.
Event listeners can also be a tricky area.
So you can see here we've got button, and
then we've got a button at event listener,
but then nothing ever removed that.
So if we have a long-held
single-page application, and
you move away from the area of
the screen where you had that,
you can end up with a tremendous
amount of event listeners.
Now, one at a time isn't gonna
get you in any trouble, but
imagine you're rendering
an infinite virtual table of data.
And as you insert items in there, you add
event listeners for each one of them, so
that when they're click done.
They do something,
people are scrolling and scrolling.
You're not removing the old
ones like before long,
you can end up with hundreds
of thousands or millions.
Now, there's ways around this,
you can do event delegation.
You can only have the listener on
the table itself instead of each node, or
you can just have cleanup methods
that intelligently clean it up.
But these are an area that
can really bite you, and
you can kind of leak memory because
the event listener itself retains
the HTML element in memory
because it needs it there.
So you're not only keeping
the JavaScript code, but
you're actually keeping that JavaScript
reference to the HTML element.
Intervals, another one, right, you can
have these set intervals that do stuff and
you don't clear them, right?
The set interval and
set timer return a clear ID that you can
call clear interval and clear timer.
Again, maybe not a problem if you have
one that just runs throughout your
application.
But this can bite you quite often,
where you just have some task that
keeps running long after it's needed.
Another one now is detached DOM nodes.
So when you think about the web, and you
think about JavaScript interacting with
HTML, and
you see these patterns of create element.
You create a div, you add some attributes
to it, you stick it in the dumb.
One thing that's hard to remember is that
you sort of have two copies of every
element.
You have the one in HTML that you
stuck in with append HTML, but
you also have in JavaScript memory,
reference to it.
And that clearing the HTML doesn't
necessarily remove that JavaScript graph.
I don't know if I'm explaining that well,
but does that make sense?
So you create a div, and you name it foo,
and you give it some properties.
Then the body append HTML, foo.
At this point, the HTML has grown,
which causes memory to increase.
But so, too, has your JavaScript memory
heap, because you've got this thing.
So now if you call body.removeElement foo,
that's fine.
It'll shrink back your HTML.
But if you don't unset or
delete that in-memory div that you made,
its memory will just stick around.
So again, these things can be quite very
innocent when you're doing it once or
twice or ten times, but
quite dangerous if you have a really
high-speed loop that's running.
And could be creating a bunch of these
things, sticking them in memory and
not clearing them.
I don't know why I added this,
I thought it was cool.
It's like visualization
somebody made this repo.
It's like all these visualizations of
garbage collection, memory techniques or
whatever.
And so you can see this one on
the left is running very periodically.
And it's Mark and sweep approach,
where it's collecting things and
as they fall out of retention,
it clears that room or whatever.
And the other one is running these
regular large GC events, where let's say,
I grow and grow and grow, and then it
does a full application sweep afterwards.
This isn't really important,
I just thought these were really cool.
That being said, let's move on
to our last lesson and exercise.
Memory is pretty cool.
Yeah, please.
>> Male Student 1: And I think this is
a good place to use unsubscribe and
then undestroy when you're
working with angular.
>> Jon Kuperman: Yeah, so frameworks
often provide and yeah this is great.
And it ties into a lot of things,
there are quite a lot of API's that
frameworks that offer you cleanup
techniques, cleanup tools.
So yeah, like in angular you have the
ability to have these hooks that are on
destroy or on cleanup, and
you can do work in there.
React hooks have the same thing
where they return a cleanup method.
So when React disposes the component,
you can dispose of extra things you want.
A great place to use it if you have a
component angular react that sets a global
event listener,
then you should hook into the cleanup and
remove that event listener.
This is more true with new things,
I work on signal stuff a lot,
and these signals capture
a bunch of scope.
They also effects, and signals always
have return cleanup functions.
So it's probably a pattern you've
seen a lot before where you'll have
some framework thing, and then
optionally it can return a function, and
that function runs on cleanup.
And I think a big part of writing high
performance code is taking advantage
of that and
making sure you do whatever you need to
kinda clean up your application code.